---
title: GLoGtober day 1, Duels
tags: [ osr, glog, glogtober, duels ]
desc: It's Hiiiiiiigh Noon!!
layout: post
---

Today kicks off [GLoGtober](https://sunderedshillings.blogspot.com/2020/09/glogtober.html), and we're starting things off with a bang.
<!-- more -->

## What is a duel?

Duels are usually one on one, however it is possible for an individual to call out multiple opponents at once.
If there are multiple gunman on both sides of a fight, you have a shootout, not a duel.
If there are more than 4 gunman on one side, you have an ambush, not a duel.
If either side is caught off guard, it's murder, not a duel.

## How to duel

Initiative for a duel is determined, not with a roll of the dice, but with playing cards.
Each participant is dealt a number of cards equal to the number of attacks they can make each combat round.
They may then trade out a number of cards equal to their DEX mod for new ones.
If a player has a class template that grants them advantage on initiative for duels, they are dealt 2 hands and must discard one before trading out cards.
They may not swap cards between these hands before discarding one.

Once all cards have been dealt then all parties show their hands.
Order of operation proceeds according to the following:

1. **Royal Flush** Ace, King, Queen, and Jack of the same suit.
All opponents are gunned down, no save.
If an opposing party was also dealt a Royal Flush then all parties involved die in a hail of bullets.

2. **Straight Flush** 4 sequential cards all of the same suit.
Auto hit on all opponents.
Targets save against wands, on fail they die.
On success they are reduced to 1hp.

3. **Four of a Kind** Four cards of the same value.
Auto hit against up to three targets.
Targets save against wands, on fail they die.
On success they are reduced to 1hp.

4. **Flush** 4 cards of the same suit.
Auto hit three attacks.
Roll damage +5 for each.

5. **Straight** 4 sequential cards.
Auto hit up to two targets.
Targets save against wands, on fail they die.
On success they are reduced to 1hp.

6. **Three of a Kind** Three cards of the same value.
Auto hit two attacks.
Roll damage +5 for each.

7. **Two Pair** Two cards of one value and two of another.
Auto hit a target, no roll necessary.
Target saves vs wands, on fail they die.
On success roll damage +3.

8. **Pair** Two cards of one value.
Auto hit a target, no roll necessary.
Roll damage +3.

9. **High Card** A single card of higher value than anything in any other parties hand.
Roll to hit a target.
If successful roll damage +3.

In the case of a tie, you may use suit value to break the tie.
Spades are the highest value, followed by hearts, then clubs, then diamonds.

Once cards have been used to attack, they are discarded from the hand and the next highest match to the above list goes next.
For instance if one player has a King and a Queen, and their opponent has a Jack and a seven, then the first player would get to roll to attack twice before the other would go.
